+++
title = "Limitations, limitations"
date = 2023-04-19T22:30:46+03:00
draft = false
image = "images/blog/limitations_thumbnail.png"
+++

# Limitations of natural intelligence.
On average, a person can manage 4-7 minimal concepts used in context at the same time. This explains why programmers are advised to break programs down into multiple small subroutines, as humans cannot perceive the entirety of text with a volume greater than half a regular book page.
Furthermore, it can be difficult for programmers to explain their ideas to other people, especially if they are unfamiliar with technical terminology and concepts. This, again, can lead to errors in perception and, as a result, misunderstandings.
Imperfect processes also contribute to this. For example, programmers often do not separate the semantic layer of problem solving from the coding means of implementing the solution. Most projects are unstructured, which makes it difficult to understand the task at hand.
Thus, the limitations imposed on each other and on the software development process worsen the understanding of the goals of processes and tasks. This results in a phenomenon familiar to everyone - it is impossible to complete a task without errors, even with a detailed description of the task and the absence of time pressure.
When a designer is involved in the process of understanding something, they should always use an iterative approach. Understanding comes gradually, step by step, and not all aspects of the task can be mastered at once. If a project is created directly in code, this leads to regular changes to the task, which can be difficult. In the process of understanding, some concepts may turn out to be less important, while others may acquire more significant value.

# Limitations of artificial intelligence

Language models, such as GPT, have capabilities for overcoming limitations in data transmission. However, they have their own limitations that should be considered when using them:
The algorithm often struggles to interpret context, especially if it is large, complex, or has multiple possible meanings.
Memory also imposes limitations: despite using huge amounts of information during training, the length of word and phrase sequences outputted is limited.
Language models are highly dependent on the quality of the training data.
Finally, an non-obvious limitation is that the data is context-dependent and must work within that context. If used in a different context, the results may be inaccurate.

# Limitations of software systems
Finally, both humans and language models use widely accepted programming systems as the last link in the chain.
However, existing programming languages and development environments do not have sufficient tools to reflect and serve this evolution of understanding. At most, reflection of the current understanding of the process can be provided.
The main paradox of programming is that the final product of the development of a software system should be an exhaustive and accurate understanding of the problem being solved, which is not recorded anywhere and not fixed. Instead, only a partial solution to the problem generated by this understanding is recorded and fixed. Recovery of the original understanding from the solution always proves impossible.